So tell me where we are right now.
Yes, on the first floor with the Rangel apartment.
That was the first apartment that was ready here.
Most of the pieces of furniture from the 17th century.
So if you want to, we could take a walk.
Yes, we can have a look at it too.
And this material that you gave me gives us a pretty good history of this, right?
Yes, yes, yes.
So I don't have to write down all the history that you're talking about.
No, no, no, no, not at all.
Because there is a, yes, a really good book in English, but everything you want to know about it.
Because I like to see instead of just taking notes.
Enjoying knowledge.
Yes.
Oh, my.
And this is a 300-year-old building, right?
It reads?
Yes, more than 300.
And here is Colbert Baranin.
That was in 1651 when he was a Count of Salmis in Finland.
He was General Governor of Swedish Pomerania.
And, yes, he had the best part of his career behind him, actually.
He was born 1613.
So he was not 40 years old, but... And he's the person who established this?
Yes, yes, yes.
He was born in the stone house, the side house.
Right here, yeah.
And his father had got that building together with the estate out here.
It was after the time of the nunnery.
Is that a contemporary painting?
Yes, it is, yes.
And the painter was David Klöcke Ehrenstrahl, who was a quite important painter in Sweden at that time.
Okay, excellent.
And there is a picture of that portrait in the book too.
Oh, good, excellent.
And his wife, she came from the north of Germany.
She was a quite poor lady, from a noble family, but not a family of counts.
So Kondistarana's father, he was quite disappointed.
He was even angry because he wanted his son to marry a Swedish countess or a daughter of a Jew or something like that.
But they lived together until she died and had 11 children.
Had 11 children.
Did she die young?
No, no, she was quite old.
She died when she was about 60 years old.
She had had so many children.
How do you say that?
That's why I asked the question.
And all these devices, these are all contemporary to the period?
Yes, oh yes, they are.
They were already about 1665.
And they are covered with wood.
That's quite remarkable.
But that was an idea that Carl de Stavrangen had seen in France.
They did it like that.
What did you call it?
They called it a fireplace.
And in the corner, an oven.
That was the best way to use the room, to use that one.
Excellent.
And then... This is the entry room?
What room is this?
Yes, this is an empty room where the guests could wait for Carl Gustav Ragnar.
Room for reception.
Reception room.
Yes.
And this is on what floor, the first floor?
Are we on now?
Yes, this is the first floor, yes.
You see in the ground floor there were only kitchens.
Service level in a way.
And then tapestries of golden leather.
Do you, by the way, this is open to the public?
Oh, yes, it is.
And is all that in the material that you gave me?
Yes.
Because I will publish this in a magazine piece, and you might get some business out of it.
Oh, yes.
It's all public.
The library isn't.
But groups can come here.
You can order a visit.
Well, that's good.
I'll make that point clear in the piece, too.
Great.
This is nice.
Tackle.
It's like a time capsule, isn't it?
Yes.
It's not like a museum.
It really is like a house that hasn't changed.
You see, the daughter called Savania, she inherited the gospel.
It's unbelievable.
Yes, and she decided... It's really boring.
It's really something.
It was decided to be a museum at the beginning of the 18th century, actually.
Wow.
And this room you would call what?
Yes, it started to be a dining room, but now we call it the King's Hall because there are Swedish kings and kings all around the walls here.
Absolutely.
Are there pictures of these that you gave me?
So I don't have to take any photographs.
No, no, I think if they are okay for you, I think you can use them.
This flash isn't sufficient to get anything decent out of here.
It's just a waste of time.
effort, not just the film.
It wouldn't do any justice to what we're looking at here.
This is really interesting.
This is the reception room of the countess.
So she has got her rooms on this side of the dining room and the count on the other side.
Does the book explain who these people were in the scheme of things?
Yes.
Monarchs of Sweden, right?
This was a noble family.
Yes, a family of great importance at that time.
Quite obviously, yes.
With lots of power and so on.
But in the king's service, so to speak, that's why they could have their father.
Is that a contemporary portrait of Gustavus Adolfus?
Yes, Gustavus Adolfus, that's on guilt level too.
Could that have been a portrait of him?
Yes, could have been.
What is the material on the wall here?
That's letter.
Letter from Kaff.
Guilt.
Guilt's letter from Kaff on the wall.
Wow.
I think the fabrication was in Holland at that time.
Kogestavangel bought those wall hangs from Holland.
But it was not in fashion in the 18th century and in other causes they took it away, but in Skogloster they were preserved and they are still hanging here.
So there must have been a picture hanging over that?
Yes, that's right.
And up there it was a very good black color.
Yes, because there's no sun hitting it.
No, no, that's right.
Same thing with books.
Some of them are Italian but they also come from Holland, even Swedish.
How much of the glass on the windows would you say is original?
Nothing on this floor.
Higher up in the library there could be a few parts left from the 17th century but nothing here.
It says something though about the strength of the glass that they made, if some of it is managed at least to... Oh my, this is a royal bedroom, right?
Yes, but that's for the Countess Rangel.
I wonder if the bed was comfortable.
Not that I propose crying it, I'm just curious.
And here's one of the towers with a small exhibition with small pieces of silver and
and so on.
What is the material on the wall?
This is like a stucco or a plaster?
It's brick inside.
It's brick.
It's all made of brick.
Brick with a plaster on top of it.
Yes.
That's right.
Any questions up here?
Most of the rooms on this floor, the ceilings are covered with stucco, but here it was uncovered.
And this room was used as a wardrobe.
at the time of Rangel, so it wasn't so important to make it nice.
And are these cases, these must have been put in late?
Yes, oh yes, about 1930.
Look at the door, though.
The ceiling, yeah.
What kind of wood do you think that is?
It must just be a local... It's hard to say.
But it sure has been.
It's held up pretty well.
Could be okay.
A documentary film, a little film.
It's about restoring on paintings.
So this is pretty much the way it would have felt to the
Because there's no heating here.
No, no heating.
Only on the ground floor.
And the ground floor is heated since 1930, not earlier.
But whatever we feel is the way they felt it, in other words.
Yes, yes, definitely.
But in wintertime, Carl de Servanio preferred to stay in Pomerania or in Stockholm.
He had a castle in Stockholm.
Just translate for me what that says up there.
I don't remember.
It doesn't identify what's in there.
No, these are just words of wisdom in different languages.
And there are words of wisdom all around here in different languages.
These are all tributes to members of the family?
Yes, you mean those portraits?
These portraits and these little sayings?
Yes, those portraits, they are older, they are from the beginning of the 17th century.
So we think they were placed in the stone halls before, and they were taken up because those men, they were officer comrades to Hermann Rangel, the father of Karl Gustav Rangel.
And this painting on the ceilings is contemporary to the period too?
Yes, it is, yes.
So there's no attempt, and I think I quite agree, to try and restore any of this to any of its... No, no.
You leave it just the way it was?
We leave it just the way it is.
I see.
But it was changed in the 18th century.
A little quarter right up here.
Yes, yes.
You see it came from a book made in Rome.
Oh, these little sayings.
Little sayings of wisdom.
Villa Benedetti, and it was born, born.
Does the guidebook mention this?
Mention these things?
Yes.
I don't have to write down.
No, no.
There's one that says something like, the farmer is... We might call them little platitudes of wisdom, right?
Yes, exactly.
They are in Swedish and they are really platitudes.
And this would have been destroyed.
So Sweden had a period of wealth in the 17th century and that was it.
You think it would have been destroyed?
Oh, they would have been restored.
Oh, they would have been modernized, yeah, many times.
Because if you look at the Italian houses in Rome, they are in the 18th or 19th century.
It's kind of, for me, it's like going in to see Samuel Pepys's library, which hasn't been touched in 350 years.
And that's just the exciting thing, isn't it?
It's a time capsule.
This is another apartment, right?
This is another apartment.
And it got its interior at the beginning of the 18th century, mainly.
Kolkostarganger's eldest daughter inherited the castle, and she was married to a man from the first Swedish noble family, Count Brahe.
So this family, the Brahe family, they owned Skoklostrand in 1930.
And this apartment got its interior at that time.
So there is some electricity in here.
I can see there's a cord over there.
Yes, that's right.
How long have you worked here?
Oh, more than 20 years.
Mostly with the books?
Yes, yes.
And so you're a librarian?
Yes, I'm a librarian.
So I came here at the beginning of the 1970s.
This looks much more recent.
Yes, oh yes, that's from the 19th century, when the Brau family had dinners here in this room.
So this actually had people living in it, though, for several hundred years?
Yes, yes.
And you see, the last family, we have got three families at Skokloster, the Wrange family, the Brauer family, and the Fonessen family.
And the Fonessen family, they had only Skokloster, if I say so.
They had only one castle.
So they lived in the castle all around the year.
The other families had several castles.
Yeah.
you can see it's uh my wife is going to come when i tell her the things that i see her
and that is it was chilly up here they had some special fuel for winter living with uh with the lower what did they do for recreation here did they have
Outside, they have horses and things?
Yes, there was a stable down here.
It's a restaurant today.
Part of that building was a stable.
And there were lots of small buildings at the lake here.
And taught Swedish pupils to be good.
I wonder if anybody could do that today.
What do you call the architecture here?
We think of the main...
responsible architect is Caspar Fogel and he was an architect from Pomerania so he had been an assistant to Rangel in Pomerania where he also constructed some castles but also Nicodemus Tussin had made some drawings drawings
And architecture.
Baroque.
Do you agree, Lawrence?
Yes.
Has to be.
Without question.
Quite decisively Baroque, I would say.
And those initials up there over the crest must be for the family, right?
Yes, yes.
Family weapon.
And that is that crest?
Yes, yes it is.
And I think it's a picture of that too.
He told me that Vertumnus, the painting Vertumnus, will be taken up here for the television later on.
And she will try to tell us, can we go down, so we can go down there and have a look at it.
Not for materials.
Before he started to build the cluster, he had planned the cluster for 20 years when they started to build here in 1654.
So now we're on the third floor, on the second floor.
Yes, now we are on the second floor.
Unfinished hall.
This is the hall we spoke about in the car.
Oh, wow.
Left from one day to another, more or less.
Just explain a little bit for me.
Nicholas, I've got to take some pictures of this.
And how about if you just hold this tape recorder while I...
This was a big magical, but he was out of money, and he had to talk to us from one day from another.
Well, it's great for us that he did.
There are many completed banquet halls, but how many incomplete ones?
This is because of a rancid house in Pomeranian, in 1676.
And it took about two weeks to give them snow here.
And are these the... Are these the working tools that were in place?
They were all kept here, up there.
Not in this hall, but up there.
And everything has been collected in this room now to show the tools in that time.
That's perfect.
So they just stopped?
Yes, they just stopped.
Probably because they weren't going to get paid, you think?
Yes, yes, yes.
They didn't know what was left, and if it was possible, it would get money if they went down here.
Thank you indeed.
That's it, yeah.
And you know, from time to time, Codras Lavani didn't have so much money.
So, on time, during the building of the car, it just worked because it didn't know if there were any money left to go and work on.
This was how many years ago was this?
This was 1676.
So 1676, 321 years later, it's still, that's it, it's stuck.
It would have been a very nice hole.
Oh, yes.
Oh, I think so.
What do you think would have gone on top of the floor?
Some sort of tiles?
Yes, yes.
They just quit in place.
Amazing.
And you see the beam structure?
This would have been covered, probably, you think?
Yes.
I'm sure you all took up that in the collection of Kogelsarvangen, the ceiling construction that was planned to be here.
Oh, so they have... So we took it from the book?
Yes.
And the book is in the book.
That's very... Isn't that spectacular?
Sometimes the hall is used for a concept.
Nice sound in here.
So what do we call the hall?
Unfinished Hall.
Great, okay.
It's from the Eastland, this is Italian.
Your boys die, your friends die, you die, but the doom of the dead man doesn't die.
It's interesting.
What's in Italian here?
Incredible.
Definitely.
Little nuggets of...
What is the roof?
Is that slate?
Tiles.
I wonder where they were made.
Near here, do you think?
They were made in Holland, but when Skotloster was restored, we could buy exactly the same in Poland, and that was much, much cheaper.
But I'm amazed that after so many hundreds of years you could still get the same styles.
Yes, and it was possible to get them from Holland, but it was too expensive for us, so therefore we bought them from Poland because they made the same.
So there was a restoration here?
Yes, there was a restoration from 1967 when the state bought this building.
And then the restoration took about 10 years.
I see.
And when was it open for the public?
It has been open all the time since 1967 and even before during the private time, but not as much as now.
But as a tourist you could come here in the 1950s and it was open at least on the ground floor and on the first floor.
So in the summertime you could come here by boat.
Was this a militarily strong family?
Did they have soldiers?
We see them on horses and in armour and things.
Yes.
Were they, uh... Yes, Carlos Arranger and his father, they were soldiers, but all his sons died, so... So tell me where we are now.
On the third floor, with armor and library.
I see.
And is that what that says there?
That's Italian... Oh, so that doesn't identify the room.
Can you... Yes.
You go.
I have a key.
He, who, make you more caretze, more... Again, it's another one of those nuggets of... I have to figure it out.
I understand it in Italian.
Yes.
The one who talks the sweetest is out to fool you.
But caretse means... Yeah, you wish it to fool you.
I like it, go to that way.
They have the names of the European cities.
I see, okay.
So Stockholm, Roma, Amsterdam and so on.
And before, it would come here in a small street.
Yes, yes, the name of the room.
And all the proverbs are written down in a book too, but I think, yes.
Yes, yes, yes.
That's what we probably think, these are proverbs in the world.
Yes, yes.
How many rooms in the castle?
About 80.
That's right.
I would have thought many more.
Wouldn't you?
I would have thought two or three hundred.
For example, one room that has been divided into two parts in the 18th century, so it has been changed a little at a later time.
These are very spacious as well.
That's right.
Now we enter the library.
Oh, look at this, huh?
This is quite extraordinary.
Elizabeth, is it Mr. Bassbanks?
Bassbanks, yes.
You visited the Nobel Library yesterday.
Yesterday, yes.
So you would have seen the shelves.
That's right, yeah.
with inspiration from Schokloster.
Yes, that's exactly right.
Yeah.
In the 60s?
Oh, yes.
Yes, that's right.
Tell me, tell me who, how you get to have so many books here.
How did this happen?
It started with Korgoster Rangen.
And in 1665, he made the catalog.
And about that time, those rooms were ready.
So he started to put his books in the biggest rooms in this department.
It's a room called Rome.
And this collection was his lifetime less than 2,000 volumes.
But when he died, he had about 2,400 volumes.
Which is considerable for the time.
Yes, yes it is.
And now only...
a part of that collection is kept here.
Because when he died, his collection was divided into four parts for his daughter.
And only the part that belonged to the daughter who inherited the castle is still kept here.
That's a pity.
But his daughter was married to Count Breuer, and Count Breuer took his books here from another castle, Rilberholm, that's north of Stockholm.
And he also had a collection in Stockholm, and he took
that collection here too.
And then he inherited a collection from an island in the south of Sweden, Die Stingsöl.
That was the collection of his relative of... Uncle Brøy, yes.
So at the beginning of the 18th century there were actually three family collections here.
And in the middle of the 18th century
A collection from a castle north of Uppsala that belonged to the Bjelke family came here.
How were they coming here?
Heritage.
So this is really a lot of different libraries.
Yes, there are five different libraries.
That's in the material you gave me?
Yes, yes it is.
And the collection from Salsa, the collection coming here in the middle of the 18th century, that's the biggest collection.
with 8,000 volumes.
So you have a total of how many books approximately?
Totally 20,000 volumes, but some of those volumes have got those small prints made for weddings and for funerals, or maybe only four or eight sides, and they are collected in volumes.
So we could talk about 20,000 volumes and about 30,000 prints.
Mm-hmm.
And in terms of the library itself, what kinds of books are they?
Are they important books?
Are they of great interest as scholars, and why?
What is here that you are unlikely to find someplace else?
Oh, yes, yes.
If I start with Carl Gustav Rangen, there are lots of books that he was supposed to have.
That belonged to a man of his position.
But there are also many books that we really know that he was interested of.
to have, to read, to study.
So he was an intellectual, you would say?
In a way.
I'm going to be very careful now.
Because he was very interested in architecture and in science.
And he bought new books on those items.
All his life.
And where did he buy his books, given that period when he lived?
Yes, that was from about 1640, until he died.
So where did he buy his books?
Book agent.
Who was his book agent?
Yes, he had lots of book agents, you see.
He had agents in Hamburg, in Frankfurt, in Amsterdam, and even in London.
But he bought very few books from London.
But he didn't write any books, no?
No, no.
Frankfurt, Amsterdam, where else?
Amsterdam, Nynberg.
Uh-huh.
And so they're largely in, they're almost all mostly in Latin, the books?
Yes, but actually Havre Favanger preferred books in modern languages.
Uh-huh.
So if it was possible to get a book in German or French, they prefer that to Latin.
And that's quite remarkable because Pagot, Pagot, because the account from his time and his language, he always bought books in Latin.
Uh-huh.
Did he buy books for content, or are there any rare books?
Are there any incunables here, for instance?
Yes, there are incunables, and most of them were taken as war booties.
By whom?
By Rangel.
He took a war bootie in Germany, in Poland, and also in Denmark.
And they're here, they're here.
And they are here, yes, they are here.
Will you show some together with the ink text?
Sure, yeah.
Like the Archibaldau paintings also?
Oh, we're going to see the Archibaldau paintings?
Yes, I think it will be arranged.
Oh, that's great.
My book has the Archibaldau painting on the back, on the dust jacket, the librarian.
It would really be great.
And Rangel has decided
that the library should face east.
Of course, we had learned that it was better to have books standing facing east.
Was he right?
I don't know.
What do you think?
It's wonderful here.
It's sun in the morning, and when the sun is heating in the afternoon, it's not sun here, and I think that's good for the books.
Was this a room for study, too, or mainly just for storage?
No, only for storage, but there are odd desks, and there have been chairs all the time.
We know that from the inventory that was made when he died.
So he has been sitting here studying his books.
Where we are right now, he ended up being here.
Are any of these pieces of furniture contemporary?
No, they are later, from the 18th century.
Most of them.
Here is an original chair, but the chair was not used for... Yes, original floor.
But this chair was not used for studying.
It's a chair for, we think, one of our kings who was quite easy as he was old.
And he could sit in his chair, and he could lie in his chair, and he could use this as a table or as a desk.
Maybe the king never left the chair when he was sitting here.
Which king was it did you say?
But why would it be up here?
Because this Count Brahe had a married
Oh, no, that's too much detail, I think.
But, but, you can't... By inheritance?
Yeah, yes.
Charles 10?
No, no, they only brought his chair here.
He wasn't here?
No, no, not at all.
He used it when he was in Gothenburg.
Okay.
You really wouldn't call it a clone.
But I think it's quite exclusive.
And this was a velvet.
But it is all destroyed with the clothes because of the sun.
And that is a butthole, that particulature?
That's from 1660.
Wow.
Oh, that's Colombia in Germany.
And it was placed outside the door here because this room has got the main column.
So... Now that you should almost preserve.
I mean, that's gonna... Yes, but it's quite difficult.
It's probably going past the point.
All of them are in very, very bad condition.
And we think that something was made wrong at the beginning.
I see.
When the putters put them up on canvas.
The glue or something like that.
Yes, wrong materials in some way.
Just a clear loop.
Yes.
Too bad.
I'd hate it.
Is it to do with the learning method?
No, no.
It has nothing to do with it.
Well, why Pythagoras up there, for instance?
Wasn't he a sculptor, as a matter of fact?
Pythagoras?
No.
No, he was Pythagoras.
Traxidilis, I'm thinking of.
Yes, he was.
You know, the mathematics, that's right, yeah.
But the walls and the ceiling, they were repainted about 1820.
Then there was the first restoration here in all the castles and many rooms changed.
I was just going to say that they are an excellent piece.
Is that 1820, I think is what you said?
Yes, 1820, yes.
But were they, you know... It was about the same decoration before.
We can have a look at it in another room where they didn't paint all the walls.
And the book shelves from about the same time.
But they were not painted until 20 years later, about 1840.
So on some of the... You can see small... Let's go.
Little pinkles.
Patches of the colour?
Yes.
So when they painted, they didn't take a look at it?
No, they didn't take a look at it, yes.
That's when you look at the vellum.
Incredible.
That's funny.
And all the numbers you see here, they can be found in old book catalogs.
And so what was the catalog scheme?
By a session or did they have any kind of a scheme or subject?
Yes, yes, because Rangel, he had divided his library into it.
different sections depending on what subject it is.
So there are books on theology and on history and on philosophy, but he has also got lots of books in Roman languages, in Italian and Spanish and French, and they are kept together.
It doesn't matter what subject they are written on, but they are kept together.
So if they're ever misplaced, it's going to be impossible to find them.
No, but you have this...
The order of the books has been restored, so for some time it was destroyed.
But that's what you've been doing to a large part, trying to figure out whose library did this book belong to at first.
So today they're all placed by owner, but in the 1820s that was all mixed up.
So that's also an important part of your catalogue you're doing now, is to trace it.
Where did it come from?
That's what you're doing.
You're trying to determine... I think you should tell us that.
We started... I wasn't here in 1967, but this work started in 1967.
And all the libraries were mixed at that time.
But the catalogs were kept from the time when the books were bought.
So it was not easy, but it was possible to reconstruct.
The provenance basically.
You've been able to see, for example, this label is typical of him and this kind of signature is typical of him.
So that's how you've been learning about it.
Where does the idea come from?
Do you have any library that's done the same thing?
No, but I think that Dr. Limberg from Kobe, who was responsible for the library at that time,
he thought it was the only right when to do.
Was he a librarian?
Yes, he was a librarian.
A rare book librarian.
Yes, yes.
The Royal Library, where you were yesterday.
And he's still living.
Yes, and he's still working there.
He was here with Carola, for example.
Carola told you about this.
He was here with us.
How about the original owners?
Did they have anybody who functioned as a librarian?
No, no, they didn't.
I think Carl Gustav Ragnar was quite mean.
So when he had got a quite big collection, somebody was asked to make a catalogue, but it was a very, very simple catalogue.
Inventory?
Yes, yes, more of an inventory.
A short title where the book was printed and what year, but nothing else.
The size was... So really, the books were placed here, and there really was nobody...
No, no, no, not at all.
That's important.
Yes.
It's amazing they survived intact.
Yes, but I think that from time to time, during the last century, people have not been so very interested in this library.
So it has been preserved here, and nobody has been interested in it.
In our time, interest is growing.
Thank you very much.
Yes, yes.
That's amazing.
What would you say is the great significance, in your view, of this library?
What is the significance, other than the historical significance?
Is there a significance in terms of the book itself?
What would a scholar find of particular interest here in these books?
Do you get scholars who... Oh, yes.
Oh, yes, you get them.
If I take an example, a young lady from Germany, she has studied books coming from Germany.
And she has been looking at all the books here to find German names, special German names, because she came from Mainz.
And she know that folks were taken from certain places around mines to Sweden at the time of the Thirty Years' War.
And she tried to find them in Sweden.
And she also studied the bindings because... Yes, the decoration and family weapons.
And she take all those pieces together.
This is a great example of...
believe it or not, the history of the book.
Yes, yes.
Not the content.
What you can determine about a society by the making of the book, the binding of the book, the selling of the book, the migration of the book, the, you know... The life of the book.
The life of the book will tell you so much about the history.
It's the reconstructing... That's exactly what this... Yeah, exactly, yeah.
Absolutely, that's precisely that.
That's the kind of research going on in the Financier Library today.
There are other libraries where you can trade the order.
It's still on fine in Holland, for example.
You can find the letters in order.
But now this young gentleman, this German lady who's doing this research, she's specifically tracking German war booty.
War booty.
We're talking about war.
We have to be very clear which wars we're talking about.
Yes, that's right.
and also the wars, there were two wars between Sweden and Denmark in the 17th century, and Carl Gustav Rangel took part in both of them.
Which books do you think, obviously you're going to see by the books that he took, which books were important to him?
He must have left some behind.
Yes.
Which books would, why would he take certain ones and leave others?
What was his sense of value?
Yes, we know that then he used...
He fellow of more education to help him to take the right books.
He got advice.
He didn't do it on every occasion.
Sometimes he got advice, yes.
Somebody might say, you know, this is... And of course, I had certain interests, for example, architecture.
His personal interests, yes.
All the books of architecture that he could take.
And what kinds of places would they plunder?
It causes official buildings in towns.
Monasteries.
Monasteries, for example, many monasteries.
Quite a few Jesuit monasteries and libraries are in Sweden today, in Uppsala, for example.
Many parts in Uppsala.
This book by Valde, has that been translated?
No, no, no.
And it should have been translated to German.
Yes, they would find it useful.
Which book are we talking about?
Otto Walde has written a great work about war booting in Sweden.
Exactly where they went.
That's not available in English, of course.
No, and there is one copy in a public library in German.
Which is amazing, because that's a very important book.
So therefore, Nadine Fogler, that's the name of the scholar working here, she had to learn Swedish.
And it started with that he knew that Valde, I had to read Valde.
And then she said, I had to learn Swedish, otherwise I can't read Valde.
So we hope she'll translate it.
That's good, that'd be great.
Okay, what else?
You gonna show us some other books?
This is almost like deja vu in Twitter, isn't it?
Come on now.
Let's start.
You can do it.
Can I just take a picture of you there with your books?
Yes.
If you could just stand in a little bit.
Actually, you could bring one out here.
Because this is the book with the ceiling, the unfinished wall.
Yes.
german yes yes yes i think this is very good i like i like with your hands you can just talk yes i'll go back to that picture yes okay um i think this is one of the best
And that book is what?
What is that book that you just took out?
So it's an architectural book that has the original design for that unfinished building that we saw downstairs.
That's right.
And this book dates from about when?
From 1649.
And this is the construction.
I just got a picture of that.
And we know that Carl Gustav Reinheld bought
Three editions of this book.
He wanted to check if there was something new in the next edition and the next book again.
Is it possible to say in percentage how much of this is acquired books, buying an inheritance, and how much of it is stolen from war booty?
Is there not so much?
Yes, heritage only very, very few from his father, Hermann.
And about 10% war booty.
The rest was bought.
Did he pay a lot of money, considering the books, whatever books were included?
Is it included in the inventory, what he has paid for?
Yes, sometimes, but not always.
Because he wrote letters to those agents around in Europe, and sometimes the price is sold, but not always.
And this is the number from the catalogue, 1665.
1665, number 20.
1665, yes.
That's the best catalogue made in the lifetime of Fr.
Stavanger.
Okay.
And who did the binding?
Did they send them out of the country?
We know very, very little about it.
Sometimes in Pomerania, because he bought books to Pomerania and took them to Skokloster.
So we really don't know the country?
No, no.
We know very, very little about it.
We know only what was mentioned in letters from Rangel to his agent.
But they were mainly bought down?
Yes, definitely.
So they were never locally bound?
No.
So they were bound where he bought?
Very often in those days you bought the unfinished
Yeah, the unbound books, and then you had them bound yourself.
Yeah.
So he probably just instructed them to bind them.
And most of them are very simple.
Yes, there's nothing elaborate about them at all.
In fact, there is a sameness to most of them.
Yeah.
Not very remarkable bindings.
But they've lasted 300 years ago.
Yeah.
Undestructible.
That's right.
Well, what would the best know here?
It's going to be uncomfortable.
Thank you, Max.
We have also got the second edition.
So three copies of Carolina and two here.
Wow.
Want to help her, fellas?
That's a great book.
Oh, no.
Good.
All right.
This is the second.
Tell us what you have here, please.
Yes, it's Basilius Bessler, Hortus Eichstetensis, 1640.
from Eichstätt in Germany.
Tell me, I know the book, but you could just tell me what's wonderful about it.
All the wonderful flowers in the garden collected here in copper plates.
I think this is one on the first.
the first early states.
Well, not proof prints, but they would have been very early.
But it's a pity sometimes it's not very, very nice.
It's destroyed in some way.
And it hangs a fly line.
There are very few fly lines.
That's Nicola Barthes, he was here the other year.
Barthes, can I say this?
Yes, oh yes.
He's made an inventory of this fantasy or something.
He's in my book.
Wow.
I've interviewed him two, three times.
And look at this.
And he found another book on flowers here, a manuscript.
So she hadn't... No, she hadn't seen it.
We had never heard of it either.
So I think that... He found a book?
Nicholas found a book?
Yes, yes.
That he didn't know about?
No, he didn't know about it because I think nothing has been written about it.
What was the book?
That is a war booty, a small book from a manuscript from, probably from a nunnery.
I can show it to you.
That would be great.
Yes, it's wonderful.
If Nicholas found something that he didn't know of, then that's a pretty significant find.
He was quite tired when he came.
He came from the airplane and he had no lunch.
He didn't know that.
But when he saw this book, he was so exciting.
I might give Nicholas a call for a comment, actually.
How many volumes is that?
Is that a one volume?
Yes, there's only one.
But you have two copies?
Yes, two copies.
Well, I've got the first copy too.
The first edition, sorry.
And you had a third which was stolen from you?
No, no, no.
But I think it's not easy to understand how they could take it out from the library because it's so heavy and so huge.
Why doesn't someone ask him, what are you doing?
Is that your own book?
Unbelievable.
You mean somebody took it?
Yes, took it under his arms and went out from the library.
How long ago was this?
Two weeks ago.
Oh, that's the one that we discussed in the car.
So he found an atlas of the same size and colour.
And he managed to exchange them.
So he told the librarian in the special reading room, I'm just returning the atlas.
And she said, okay.
because an accomplice of his was asking her stupid questions, so she was very busy.
Distracted it.
Yes.
So it's unfortunately still... You know, these things happen... Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Yes, this is a family Bible called Mr. Rangel, and Mr. Mokul, of course, he has written in it, because...
He has never written in the books, except in the Family Bible.
And I think that's quite annoying sometimes, because we know that he really wanted to buy a book, and he had written what he had read in the book, and sometimes he was angry.
For example, when I was told in a book that he hadn't behaved as he wanted to behave, that was in the war.
And then I, yes, I had wanted him to make notes, react in some way, but he didn't.
He only reacted in letters.
That's so good, because people say, oh, you should leave books spotless, you know, book culture again.
Book culture.
I'm having a chapter on readers and the annotations in their books, which you can tell.
So what she's saying is, why didn't he write in the book?
And here is a Bible in which he did.
You see, in this collection, we have also got
We have also got some small collections from clerks and peasants, peasants of quite good... Property owners?
Yes, property owners.
Landowners?
Yes, but not very wealthy peasants, but they have small collections of books, maybe 20 books.
And they had really used their books for making commentaries and notes.
You can really see that they have read their books.
Even books that have belonged to priests.
I just wrote what's going to be in that story.
When you have it, you don't want to lose it.
Here we are without any lights, without any heat.
on a murky day looking at ancient books.
So this is a bibliographical experience, isn't it?
So tell us again.
These are his annotations.
Yes.
This is whose annotations?
Tell me what annotations are.
You don't have to step away.
I like you in the picture.
Think about the lights.
Perhaps it's your future.
Kolbester Rangel's family Bible with annotations about...
the children, the children that were born, also when they died of course, because most of the children died when they were quite young.
And it ends with the death of his wife.
Is he eloquent?
No.
There aren't any wrangles around anymore.
So what do you learn about him?
Do you learn things about him?
No, not much.
And when was that Bible printed and where do you know?
It was printed 1642 in Lineburg.
Where?
Lineburg.
His wife was born in the neighborhood of Lüneburg.
It's only his name that has the name of Drangens.
Yes, there are many.
There are lots of Drangens.
And that's the original binding with clasps, I would think, right?
Yes, oh yes it is.
And what is the binding?
Black velvet.
But in a quite bad condition.
That's why it's kept in.
This little box.
It's been used.
Yes, it's been used.
So would you say they were a particularly religious family?
No, no, no.
But the Bible, nevertheless, is the Bible.
Yes, yes, he had lots of Bibles because he was supposed to have them.
I think it's quite common for people to use the family Bibles for limitations of the family, because it was inherited and kept to it very much.
That's right.
I think people have done it in all centuries.
Yes, continue to do it.
They will often give us a few shy leaves at the end before that process.
Yes, yes.
Yes, they have added several.
Extra leaves, yes.
And how many rooms does the library have?
Seven rooms.
Seven?
Seven rooms, totally.
Yes, seven rooms.
Since the 1820s, because at the time we called the Stavranes one room and then after some years there were two rooms and three rooms and so on.
Great.
So this basically is almost a whole side of a floor, isn't it?
Yes.
Some of them are from the time of Agnes, some of them are later.
This is beautiful, isn't it?
This is the collection of Hjälke.
And he died in 1764.
and he had got a French education and he had been diplomat in France too.
So it's a connection with French influence really.
But he also bought books in Sweden, book actions in South London and even in small towns in Sweden.
Those pictures on the side of the cases, do they identify the owners of these people?
They are contemporary to what?
Yes, they are contemporary to all the studies, yes.
But some of them are not older.
That's right.
It may not come out, but it's too English.
I got a lighting camera.
I'm going to get a mic if I were waiting.
I've got these big Nikons and a Hasselblad.
but they're too heavy to carry.
You know, I'm doing four countries, and so this is my daughter's camera.
It's a Nikko.
I said, at least it's a light.
I'm sorry, I didn't have my tape on it.
These globes are brought and brought by, in the time of whom, Carlos?
That was called Yucatanian.
Okay.
And 1662 they were made, and that's about when they were purchased?
So they were purchased new from Holland?
Probably.
Yes.
And this chart here, this, oh, that's a map of France in the background.
Okay.
There's lots of maps from Holland.
Mm-hmm.
And how long does that map do, you know?
I'm not quite sure.
That's okay.
I just thought you might know, that's all I think, which will be right here.
That's fine, but it's very old.
There's no question about that.
I wonder who that is.